# List Operations #

There are four operators which take sequences and expressions as arguments, and return a new value.

Three of the list list operations:  'map', 'select', and 'reduce' can be parallelized by the compiler or interpreter, and evaluated out of sequence.

All four list operations, including 'reduce', can be optimized by the compiler.


## Map ##

The `map` operator returns a new sequence by applying a transform expression to each item in a sequence. In some languages this is known as a map operation.

```
  var sqrs : Seq = 
    map(x in xs) 
      x * x;   
```

== Select == `

The `select` operator creates a sequence by selecting only items in another sequence that satisfy a criteria defined by an expression. In some languages this is known as a filter.

```
  var evens : Seq = 
    select (x from xs) 
      x % 2 == 0;
```

## Accumulate ##

The `accumulate` operator combines items in a list using a binary function with an accumulator value. In some languages this is known as a fold operation. The input list must have at least one element.

```
  var sum =
    accumulate (acc = 0 forall x in xs) 
      acc += x;
```

## Reduce ##

The `reduce` operator combines items in a list using a binary function to a list that contains only one item, or zero items if given an empty list as input.

```
  var sum =
    reduce (a, b is xs) 
      a + b;
```


Sequence operators can be optimized by a compiler, and are not guaranteed to execute if the resulting value is never needed. Code should not rely on side effects generated by the expression arguments.