#summary Overview of Modules in Heron.
#labels Phase-Design

= Modules =

A Heron module is a container of type definitions that can contains variables and methods that are accessible from the scope of class instances in the module. A file can contain only one module. Every program consists of at least one module. 

Unlike modules in other languages, module are not singletons and their member data is not include the global scope.  

Modules can inherit from another module, and can import other modules. 
 
A module has the following layout:

{{{
module MyModule
{
  inherits
  { }
  imports
  { } 
  fields 
  { }
  methods
  { }
}

class SomeClass 
{ }

// Type declarations ... 
}}}

== Module Aliases ==

When a module is imported it can be assigned an alias as follows:

{{{
import {
  HelloWorld as hw;
}
}}}

== Module Imports and Module Instantiation ==

When a module imports another module it must instantiate the other module before it can use it. This is done using the `new` operator. Module constructors are any functions with the reserved name `Constructor` and can accept arguments.

Modules can be instantiated at the import location:

{{{
import {
  HelloWorld as hw = new HelloWorld();
}
}}}

In which case the order of initialization is that same as the order in which the imports declarations occur.

Or it can be done in the constructor. 

{{{
methods {
  Constructor() {
    hw = new HelloWorld();
  }
}
}}}

== Class Instantiation and Modules ==

When a class is instantiated from another module a special form of the `new` operator is required:

{{{
module MyModule 
{
  import {
    OtherModule = new OtherModule(); 
  }
  fields {
    oc : OtherClass;
  }
  methods {
    Constructor() {
      oc = new OtherClass() from OtherModule; 
    }
  }
}}} 

== Static Data and Module Variables ==

In Heron there is no static or global data, instead module variables serve this purpose. Each class instance is associated with a particular module instance. All class instances associated with a particular module instance have access to the same data.

Module variables have similar semantics to global state, but the difference is that a module can be instantiated multiple times.    

This is an idea which was inspired by [http://gbracha.blogspot.com/2008/02/cutting-out-static.html this post by Gilad Bracha] the author of the [http://newspeaklanguage.org/ Newspeak] language.